# Emu-writer ManualThis documentation is is pretending to target a 1980s audience. So it might say some things that seem a little bit obvious to a user in the 21st century.If at any point you loose your original copy of the manual. You can load and print DSK.EMU.MANUAL1 and DSK.EMU.MANUAL2 from the Emu-writer program disk.# Loading Emu-writerEmu-writer requires a TI-99/4a with at least one floppy drive, the 32KB memory expansion, and the Editor/Assembler cartridge. A printer is recommended. (Emu-writer is still in pre-release. A 1.0 release of Emu-writer would probably have the option of an Extended Basic Autoload.)To load:1) Place the Emu-writer program disk in any floppy drive.2) Insert an Editor/Assembler cartridge into the TI-99/4a cartridge slot.3) From the TI startup screen, press any key.4) From the next menu, press "2" for "Editor / Assembler".5) From the Editor/Assembler menu press "5" for "Run Program File".6) Type "DSK.EMU.EMUWRITER" or "DSKx.EMUWRITER" and press ENTER, replacing "x" with a number corresponding to your floppy drive.This will load the Emu-writer program from disk. When loading is complete, you will see a title screen with the program's name. Press ENTER or SPACE from the title screen, and you will enter the word-processor's "editor". From here you can begin typing a document, but there is additional functionality described below.# Writing, inserting, and ovewriting textWhen you first load Emu-Writer, the editor is empty. Pressing keys for any visible character of text, will result in adding characters to the screen and to the document's first paragraph. The editor displays white text on a purple background, but the top two lines of the screen have the colors inverted. Those top two lines, show information about your document. You can't edit them directly, but they will prove to be useful as your documents grow in size.You can begin a new paragraph at any time by pressing ENTER. Pressing enter from the end of a paragraph will start a new paragraph directly after the old one. Pressing enter from the middle of a paragraph will split the paragraph into two. (You can merge the paragraphs back together with either delete key.) Separate paragraphs will always word wrap separately, so the end of a paragraph will always be the end of a line of text. But the word processor will automatically decide where to end any other line of text.By default, the cursor is in insert mode. You can tell that the flashing cursor is in this mode when it is just as tall as capital letters. You can type text from wherever the cursor is located without overwriting what text already exists. When the cursor is in the middle of a paragraph, pressing a key for visible text will cause other characters to move over by one position and make space for what you typed. When the cursor is at the end of a paragraph, pressing a key for visible text will make the paragraph one character longer.Press FCTN+2 (hold down the FCTN key and press 2) to switch between insert and overwrite mode. This changes the cursor from a box that is tall and narrow, to a box that is short and wide. when the cursor is in the middle of a paragraph now, pressing a key for visible text will replace the character under the cursor with whatever you typed. However, when the cursor is at the end of a paragraph, overwrite mode has the same behavior as insert mode. Likewise, the ENTER key has the same behavior in both of these modes.You can delete characters that you don't want any more.- Press FCTN+1, to delete the character that is located at the cursor's position. This will work the same way in insert and overwrite mode.- Press FCTN+3, to delete the character directly to the left of the cursor. This has the same effect as pressing FCTN+S followed by FCTN+1.Emu-writer has an automatic word wrap feature. Meaning that the word processor tries to fit as many words as possible on one line, but will move a word to the next line if there is no room for it on an earlier line. So as you delete characters or insert new characters from the beginning or middle of a paragraph, new space will become available or be taken away from some lines of text. So the word processor will often move some of the words to different lines, but the order of the words within a paragraph will never change.# Movement keys and "hot keys"When you wish to move the cursor, you can use arrow keys that you may be familiar with from TI Basic, or other TI-99/4a programs. Hold down the FCTN key and press S to move the cursor one space to the left. If the cursor is already at the left-most position within a line, holding FCTN and pressing S will bring the cursor to the right-most position in the previous line. Hold down the FCTN key and press D to move the cursor one space to the right. Hold down the FCTN key and press either E or X to move the cursor up or down by one line.When you first load Emu-writer, the screen is inside of the editor. The top of the editor screen mentions the key combination FCTN+8, which is used to see a list of "hot keys". Hold down the FCTN key and press 8. This will give you a list of keys that you can press from the editor, but they do not type text. These are what we mean by "hot keys". When you are done reading the list on this screen, press FCTN+9 to return to the editor.Some hot keys have been described earlier in this manual, such as FCTN+1, FCTN+2, and FCNT+3.Some hot keys give you additional ways to move the cursor. For example, FCTN+4 is called "page down" because it will move the cursor down by one screen. It has the same behavior as pressing FCTN+X 22 times. FCTN+6 is called "page up" and has the same behavior as pressing FCTN+E 22 times.FCNT+L and FCTN+; will move the cursor to the beginning or end of the current line of text.In Emu-writer the key combination of FCTN+= is ignored. In many programs, that key restarts the computer, but in Emu-writer it does nothing. See the section "Operations Menu" to learn how to quit the program.Other hot keys are described in other sections of this documentation, but you can keep coming back to the hot key screen using FCTN+8 for a faster reminder of available hot keys.# Handling 80+ column text on a 40-column screenThe TI-99/4a can display up to 40 characters of text on a single line on the screen. Most users have printers which can fit up to at least 80 characters on one line of the page. By default, Emu-writer assumes that you would like to have a left and right margin that are 10-characters long. this leaves up to 60 characters of visible text per line. (See "Margins" to learn how to change from the default.)Since the characters-per-line is different between the screen and the printer, we must adopt one of two strategies to display text on screen. These strategies are called "vertical mode" and "windowed mode". Emu-writer allows you to switch between either of these strategies instantly, using the key FCNT+0.### Vertical ModeIn vertical mode, the word wrap functionality will keep each line of the paragraph short enough so that an entire line of a paragraph can be displayed on the screen at once. Since these lines are shorter than what would be the case when the document is printed, paragraphs may appear longer on screen, than they do on paper. But the actual words in the paragraphs will not change.Vertical mode is useful when you wish to review and edit your document on screen before printing. It allows you to read the entire document from start to finish using the page-down or page-up keys. This means that you are not required to print multiple drafts of the document, marking mistakes with a pencil.If you print a document while in vertical mode, the word wrap functionality will print paragraph lines that are long enough to fill the width of the paper without changing what you see on screen. Printing a document in vertical mode will NOT result in 40-character long lines on paper.Sometimes in vertical mode, you can write a line of text that has more than 40 characters. But after the 39th character all other text can only be spaces. For example, if you are in the habit of putting two spaces between sentences, Emu-writer's word wrap functionality will always place those spaces on the same line of text. Sometimes you might move the cursor to the 41st character of a line, and part of your document will be hidden. When this happens, typing text will bring the new characters to the beginning of a line. Or using movement keys can also bring the cursor back to the beginning of a line.### Windowed ModeIn windowed mode, the word wrap functionality formats lines of text to be the same length on screen that they would be on paper. That means that the user might not be able to see the entire line on screen at once. Instead, only a 40-character wide "window" will be visible.When the cursor is at the beginning of a line of text, only the left-most 40 characters will be visible. If you hold down the right arrow key (FCNT+D) long enough, the cursor will move to the 41st character, and the window will shift by 20 characters. Now the 21st through 60th characters will be visible.You can also use FCTN+5 to move between windows faster.There isn't much of a limit to the number of windows that you can have. For example, some user may have a printer that defaults to 12 characters per inch and uses paper that is 11-inches wide. A line of text can hold 132 characters on such a printer. The user would need to press FCTN+5 to move through six different windows (6*20+20=140). (See the "Margins" section of this documentation to configure a document and paragraph for this type of situatin.)Windowed Mode is useful when you want to see the paragraphs' line breaks before printing.### Switching ModesYou can switch between vertical and windowed modes using the FCTN+0 hot key. At the right edge of the second line of the editor, there is an icon which indicates which mode you are in. The vertical mode icon looks like an arrow pointing down. The windowed mode icon looks like a parallelagram or a window tilted sideways.To experiment with these different modes, load any of the sample documents from the Emu-writer program disk. These files are called:DSK.EMU.THREELANGDSK.EMU.HANSELDSK.EMU.MANUAL1DSK.EMU.MANUAL2# Operations MenuFrom the editor, you can press FCTN+9 (hold down the FCTN key while pressing 9) to see the operations menu. You can press FCTN+9 again to return to the editor.The operations menu allows you to work with your document in ways that do not involve typing. These include saving, loading, or printing your document. They also include changing margins.Note that from the first menu you can press "F" to go to the "Files" sub-menu. From there you can press "S" to save or "L" to load.### Loading and SavingTo load a file, from the editor screen press FCTN+9, then press "F", then press "L". This brings you to a screen where you can type a file name. If the Emu-writer program disk is in drive 1, type "DSK1.MANUAL1", "DSK1.MANUAL2", "DSK1.THREELANG", or "DSK1.HANSEL" to load an example file.Saving a file is almost the same. From the editor screen press FCTN+9, then press "F", then press "S". You will see a similar screen for saving the file.Emu-writer files are saved as DIS/INT 64 files. There is no mechinism to prevent you from overwriting a file.### PrintingFrom the editor screen, press FCTN+9, then press "F", then press "P".When printing you will be asked to specify a printer name. If your printer is connected through a serial port, specify "RS232" or "RS232/2" as the printer name. If your printer is connected through a parallel port, specify "PIO" as the printer name. Do not add the ".CR" or ".LF" suffixes to your printer name.You can specify a filename as the printer name if you want. The file on disk will be of type DIS/VAR 254.If you are from the future, you might be using the emulator Classsic 99. You may use "CLIP" as the printer name. When the print operation is complete, leave your emulator and open a generic text editor. Paste the content of your clipboard into the text editor, in order to see the document formated for paper.### New documentThe new-document functin will erase the document in memory and restore Emu-writer to the state it was in at load time. From the editor screen, press FCTN+9, then press "F", then press "N". The screen will ask you to confirm that you are willing to erase the document. If you say "Y" for yes, it will return you to the editor screen with a blank document. Otherwise, it will return you to the editor screen and you can continue to edit the existing document.### QuitFrom the editor screen, press FCTN+9, then press "F", then press "N". If you confirm that you want to quit, the TI-99/4a will restart. Otherwise, the program will return you to the document you were editing.### Margins ScreenTo edit paragraph margins or page settings, from the editor screen press FCTN+9, then "M".The margin screen allows you to change the page size or the paragraph margins. Page sizes stay the same for the entire document. Paragraph margins can be different for different paragraphs.From the margin screen, you can see two fields that allow you to set the document's page size. The "page width" field measures the page width in characters. The "page height" field measures the page height in lines. The user must know how many characters per page and how many lines per page their printer is designed to print.Most users have printers that can print either 80 or 85 characters per line and 66 lines per page. But you may need to change these values based on:- paper size in inches- your printer's default number of characters per inch- your printer's default number of lines per inchEach paragraph can have margins associated with it. The user is allowed to specify left, right, top, and bottom margines. The user can also specify a first line indent or a hanging indent. A first line indent moves the begining of the first line further left than is specified for the other lines in the paragraph. A hanging indent means that every line except the first line will be indented further left than is required by the left margin.When you reach the margin screen, the word procesor remembers which paragraph you cursor was located in from the editor screen. When you specify new margins, a margin descriptor will be visible above the current paragraph in the editor screen. This margin descriptor is displayed with inverted text and will not be printed. Also notice that from anywhere in the document, the top of the screen displays labels "LM", "RM", "IN", "TM", and "BM" followed by a number. This reports the size of the left, right, indent, top, and bottom margins for whichever paragraph the cursor is in. Even if there is no margin descriptor visible on screen for a particular paragraph, you can still see the current margins.When you specify new margins for one paragraph, the margins will apply to every paragraph after that until the word processor finds another margin descriptor. For example, you might specify left and right margins of 20 on the twentieth paragraph in your document. Then you might move to the fifteenth paragraph in your document and specify left and right margins of 15. The 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th paragraphs will have the same margins as the 15th, but the 20th and later will continue to have 20-character left and right margins.The top and bottom margins are non-intuitive. If the margin descriptor is applied to the first paragraph on a page, then the top and bottom margins will apply to that page and every page after it. If the margin descriptor is applied to a different paragraph on a page, then the top and bottom margins do not take effect until the next page.If the word processor notices a margin descriptor with settings that are identical to the most recent earlier margin descriptor, it will delete the second one. For example, you might specify margins for the first paragraph. You might chage your mind, and decide that you would like those settings to apply to the third and fourth paragraphs. When you change the settings for the third paragraph, the word processor will notice that the settings for the firth paragraph are identical, and will be deleted.Again, page width and height is the same for the entire document. If you have multiple margin descriptors in your document. Changing the page size for one margin descriptor will change the page size for any other margin descriptor. You can only see the page size from the Margin screen; you cannot see it from the editor.# Undo/RedoIf you make a mistake you can press the "undo" button, CTRL+Z. For example, perhaps you press FCTN+1 five times to delete five consecutive characters. Then you change your mind. You can hold CTRL and press Z to restore those five characters.CTRL+Y is the "redo" key. If you change your mind again, you can press CTRL+Y and it will delete the characters that you just restored.Deleting, inserting, and overwriting characters can be undone and redone. Changing margins can be undone and redone. Pressing CTRL+Z more than one time will undo more than one conecutive change. The same is true for CTRL+Y.Emu-writer will remember up to 16 undo/redo events and will forget older events. Deleting 5 consecutive characters, without moving the cursor, is an example of a single event. Deleting up to 128 consecutive character can be one event, but deleting 129 characters will be regarded as two events. So, you would need to press CTRL+Z twice to restore all of them. Deleting some characters, moving the cursor, and deleting more characters counts a two undo/redo event. So, you would need to press CTRL+Z twice to restore all of them. Deleting some characters, typing some characters, and deleting more character count as three events. So, you would need to press CTRL+Z three times to restore all of the characters and remove the ones you inserted.Here is a list of all possible undo/redo events:- deleting up to 128 consecutive characters using FCTN+1 without pressing a key that moves the cursor- deleting up to 128 consecutive characters using FCTN+3 without pressing a key that moves the cursor- inserting up to 128 consecutive characters without pressing a key that moves the cursor- overwriting up to 64 consecutive characters without pressing a key that moves the cursor- changing the margins for any one paragraphAgain, editing more that 128 consecutive characters can still be undone, but Emu-writer will break that up into multiple events.